[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> And here we are, the
granddaddy of all quantum
weirdness, the infamous
double slit experiment.
>> The first people who
did these experiments--
and these experiments
have-- experiments,
crude experiments of
this kind were first
performed almost 50 years
ago, or more, 60 years ago.
Those people were flabbergasted.
>> To understand
this experiment,
we first need to
see how particles,
or little balls of matter, act.
If we randomly shoot a
small object, say a marble,
at the screen, we see a
pattern on the back wall
where they went through
the slit and hit.
Now, if we add a
second slit, we would
expect to see a second band
duplicated to the right.
Now let's look at waves.
The waves hit the
slit and radiate out,
striking the back wall
with the most intensity
directly in line with the slit.
The line of brightness
on the back screen
shows that intensity.
This is similar to the
line the marbles make.
But when we had the second slit,
something different happens.
If the top of one wave meets
the bottom of another wave,
they cancel each other out.
So now there is an interference
pattern on the back wall.
Places where the two tops meet
are the highest intensity,
the bright lines.
And where they cancel,
there is nothing.
So when we throw things, that
is, matter, through two slits,
we get this, two bands of hits.
And with waves, we get
an interference pattern
of many bands.
Good, so far.
Now, let's go quantum.
>> This is just to break
down your prejudice that says
a particle is a particle.
Now we're going to--
you've got to understand
it's a particle and a wave.
>> An electron is a
tiny, tiny bit of matter,
like a tiny marble.
Let's fire a stream
through one slit.
It behaves just like the
marble, a single band.
So if we shoot these tiny
bits through two slits,
we should get, like
the marbles, two bands.
What?
An interference pattern.
We fired electrons, tiny
bits of matter through.
But we get a pattern like
waves, not like little marbles.
How?
How could pieces of matter
create an interference pattern
like a wave?
It doesn't make sense.
>> You've got to understand,
it's a particle and a wave.
Now that you've taken
that leap, let's
get one step closer
to the reality.
It ain't either of those either.
And it's both at the same time.
>> But physicists are clever.
They thought, maybe
those little balls
are bouncing off each other
and creating that pattern.
So they decide to shoot
electrons through one
at a time.
There is no way they could
interfere with each other.
But after an hour of this,
the same interference pattern
is seen to emerge.
The conclusion is inescapable.
The single electron
leaves as a particle,
becomes a wave of potentials,
goes through both slits,
and interferes with itself to
hit the wall, like a particle.
But mathematically,
it's even stranger.
It goes through both slits
and it goes through neither.
And it goes through just one and
it goes through just the other.
All of these possibilities
are in superposition
with each other.
>> We did these experiments,
and we got certain results.
And in the light
of these results,
we asked a question
of the form, gee,
which path could the electron
have taken through this two
paths apparatus?
And if there are two
options like that,
it's just a matter of
standard classical logic,
there are four logical
possibilities, A, B, both,
neither.
OK?
We went through those
possibilities one by one
and designed an
experiment in each case
to test that possibility.
And the answer in each of
the four cases was negative.
It doesn't go through route
A. How do we know that?
Because when we put in a total
of nothing box in route A,
it has an effect
on this particle.
The total of nothing boxes don't
have any effect on particles
that pass through them.
It doesn't go through route
B for the same reason.
It doesn't go
through both routes.
Because if we stopped the
experiment in the middle,
we always find it either
on one route or the other,
but not both.
And it doesn't
take neither route,
because if we just
block up the two routes
and leave everything else
open, nothing gets through.
So we can systematically,
piece by piece,
eliminate all of the four
logical possibilities, given
the assumption that it makes
sense to ask the question,
which route did it take.
That's how we're forced
into a position, gee,
the only thing left to do here--
it's analogous to,
think about the case
of inquiring into the marital
status of the number 5.
Somebody says, gee, is
the number 5 married?
You say, no, that's not
the right thing to say.
The guy says, I see,
number 5 is a bachelor.
You say, no, that's
not right either.
Guy says, well,
what else is there?
You say, look, the
deal about the number 5
is, it's not married, it's
not a bachelor, that's
not a logical contradiction.
The trouble here is
that the whole question
of the marital status
of the number 5
is a question that can't
sensibly be raised.
That's what we're finding
out about these particles.
We say, did it take route A?
We can eliminate
it experimentally.
Did it take route B?
We can eliminate
that experimentally.
Did it take both?
We can eliminate that.
Did it take neither?
All that leaves us with
is going this route
that we go with the number 5.
Oh, I see.
Although in this case,
it's astonishing.
With the case of the
number 5, it was easy.
What this must be telling
us is that it somehow
fails to make
sense even to raise
the question in a
situation like this,
which route did
the particle take?
>> Physicists were
completely baffled by this,
so they decided to peek and
see which slit it actually goes
through.
They put a measuring
device by one slit
to see which one it went
through and let it fly.
But the quantum world
is far more mysterious
than they could have imagined.
When they observed,
the electron went back
to behaving like
a little marble.
It produced a pattern of two
bands, not an interference
pattern of many.
The very act of
measuring, or observing,
which slit it went
through meant it only
went through one, not both.
The electron decided
to act differently,
as though it was aware
it was being watched.
>> So the electron
is very peculiar.
Electron is very
peculiar in the sense
that when you are not
looking, electron can be here,
can be there, or it
can be over there,
in the corner of this room.
It can be all over this
storm, so to speak.
But whenever we look,
this is the strange thing
about this electron.
So whenever we
look, we always find
them to be in one
particular Geiger counter.
Although we may have a room
full of Geiger counters,
we never hear the Geiger counter
sticking all over the room.
This is the fundamentally
important stuff
about the electrons.
>> It was here that
physicists stepped forever
into the strange never
world of quantum events.
What is matter?
Marbles or waves?
And waves of what?
And what does an observer
have to do with any of this?
The observer collapsed the wave
function simply by observing.
>> We are always the observer.
But sometimes we
identify with the event
so much so that we even lose
the aspect of the observer.
That's why the materialist
gets totally lost
and thinks that we could
do without the observer.
>> The physics data tells us
that an object itself is really
a simplification for
what we call out there,
what is particularly when we're
looking at atomic and subatomic
particles, or atomic and
subatomic matter in any form.
What we find is how
we go to look at it,
what we choose to
examine it with,
actually changes the
properties of what
we observe to be out there.
>> Is this the observer,
and which is so intricate
to understanding the wacky,
weird world of quantum
particles and how they react?
Is this then the observer?
And even though we cannot
have a quantum field without
the observation of scientists
who have gone there,
who have uncovered it, layer
after layer after layer,
they're all observers.
But not one of them
agree conclusively
on all points in the
field, because they
are perceiving the
field mathematically
from different
angles of perception.
>> Mathematics shows us clearly
that the movement of objects
are describable only in
terms of possibilities,
not the actual events that
happens in our experience.
Quantum physics calculates
only possibilities,
that if we accept this, then
the question immediately comes,
who, what chooses among
these possibilities
to bring the actual
event of experience.
So we directly, immediately
see that consciousness must be
involved. the observer
cannot be ignored.
Observer is part of the
description of the world.
But the observer is not
included in quantum physics.
We can only describe the
objects, not the subject.
So we get the idea that
the subject must be more
fundamental than the objects.
Consciousness is
more fundamental.
>> We don't know, in
quantum mechanics,
how to hook ourselves as
observers up with the world.
We don't know how
to treat ourselves
as observers, as just another
part of the physical system
that we're describing.
The only way we know how to
do quantum mechanics as it's
traditionally
formulated is to keep
the observer outside of the
system you're describing.
The minute you put him in,
you get all these paradoxes.
And we're forced to say
things in quantum mechanics
like, look, the book is
doing what it's doing
because of quantum mechanics.
And I see that because
I'm there and I see it,
and you'd better
not try to analyze
that second part of
the sentence in terms
of applying quantum
mechanics to it,
because it's going
to break down.
That's why there are these two
separate laws of the evolutions
of physical systems,
one that applies
when you're not looking
at them, the other that
applies when you are.
But that's crazy.
>> There's no way that we're
ever going to mathematize,
or put into
mathematical formula,
this very act in which a
conscious observer comes up
with the answer.
People say, oh, the measuring
instruments, the recorder
records it and there it is.
It's on the tape.
It's recorded.
You forgot one part
of the equation.
Somebody has to
look at the tape.
And till somebody looks at the
tape, it ain't recorded at all.
Until there's an ear, there
is no sound in the forest.
>> The extreme view
would be idealism.
Bishop Berkeley and
the Hindu approach,
which says that consciousness
is all there is,
and that all there
is my consciousness,
I'm creating you, and the
camera and the world around me,
and all there is is me.
But that is a view that's
impossible to refute,
because I can't
really prove that you
are out there in reality and
have your own consciousness.
And you can't prove
that I'm conscious.
So idealism, both from the
Western standpoint, from what
Bishop Berkeley said,
and the Hindu tradition,
is one possibility.
Another possibility, the
Copenhagen interpretation
says we create reality
by, an observation
collapses the wave function.
The problem with
that is it doesn't
say what observation is.
It doesn't say what
consciousness is.
Why is our brain different from
a measuring device or anything
else?
And what is-- and
it kind of puts
consciousness outside science.
So my view is somewhere
in the middle,
with the Penrose
objective reduction, where
you have a superposition which
reaches threshold and self
collapses and chooses a
reality at that point,
of a number of-- it's
kind of a multiple choice.
It's not like starting from
scratch, anything you want.
It's a multiple choice,
multiple possibilities
for each specific collapse.
But the beauty is,
according to-- this
is one of Roger's
great contributions,
I think-- is that he said the
platonic information embedded
in the fundamental level of
the universe helps to choose
or influences, influences
which choice is made.
This only occurs in the
objective reduction.
So if you make a
conscious choice,
if you're mindful
about it and don't
act rashly or reflexively,
maybe think about it
and allow yourself
to be influenced
by what you want
to call instinct
or intuition or your higher
power or the way of the Dao
or may the force be with you,
however you want to put in,
the quantum information
embedded at the Planck scale
will influence your decision one
way or the other for the good,
generally.
So it's kind of
a way of bringing
in some kind of spiritual
divine guidance, if you will.
>> One of the important
innovations of quantum
mechanics is that a certain
fantasy that held in physics up
until then about the possibility
of observing something entirely
passively, observing it without
affecting it in the process
of observing it,
however things turn out,
it's fairly clear now that
quantum mechanics will have
ended that permanently.
Looking at things involves
interacting with them,
and it involves
interacting with them
in a way whose effect
can't be minimized,
no matter how delicate
your technology is.
>> Ultimately, science
says we have an influence
on the observed.
Strict separability,
strict objectivity,
where we can stand
back and observe nature
without really
entering into nature
and even modifying nature.
That strict separability
is no longer possible.
We understand that now
from quantum mechanics.
At the very core of life, the
very foundation of experience,
it's all created
by consciousness.
The very earliest experience,
the beginning of the universe,
you could say is when
pure consciousness,
the unified field, seeing itself
creates within its essentially
unified nature the
threefold structure
of observer, observed, and
process of observation.
From that, at that
deepest level of reality,
consciousness creates creation.
>> The observer does have
a tremendous impact on what
reality is all about.
And because of how consciousness
works for us as human beings,
because of the possible effects
the consciousness may have
on things that are out
there in the world,
we can see that there
is some relationship
between what is observed and
what the observer is doing.
So if, in that
regard, the observer
has the ability to effect
what is being observed,
then yes, there is some way
in which the observer can
ultimately impact or affect
the thing that you are,
in fact, trying to look at.
>> The problem with the observer
is that the man who makes
the breakthrough in quantum
uncertainty, for example,
Heisenberg's principle did a
great thing when he did that,
because he realized that there
was uncertainty that even he
couldn't observe but
only as uncertainty.
And that only meant that
someone else was guiding them
to their own chaotic destiny.
>> When you are not looking,
electron can be here,
can be there, or it can be over
there in the corner of this
room.
But whenever we
look, we always find
them to be in one [INAUDIBLE].
>> Quantum mechanics is shot
through and through with
certain key features, key
meaning that they're critical
to what quantum effects are,
they undergird the entire
structure of matter and
the physical universe.
They are very well describable
in mathematical terms
and they obey certain
probabilistic laws
that can be written down and
seem never to be violated.
And yet, they are completely
beyond understanding.
For instance, what we
were just talking about,
superposition and the
notion that something
can exist in two
places at once and yet
be in neither of
those two places.
OK, well, that's a perfectly
good English sentence, I think.
But you can't actually
make sense out of it.
And I can write an
equation that basically
says in mathematical
terms what I just
said in English that gives the
probability that if you look,
you'll find the
object to the left
and a certain other
probability that when you look,
you'll find it to the right.
That's all neat and clean
and the mathematics of it,
brooks no contradiction.
But to say that before
you look, the object
is in both places
and yet neither
and it isn't that when you
look, like lifting a shell up
in the shell game and
either the bead is there
or it isn't there,
it isn't that way.
Before you take the
shell off, the bead
isn't under either shell
and it's also under both.
And which one it ends up--
when you pick the shell up,
whether the bead is there
or isn't there is not
determined by anything
and doesn't actually
even come into existence
until the moment that
you pick the shell up.
>> It isn't that the particle is
in more than one place at once.
It's rather that the particle
is in a situation in which
questions about its
position can't even
be raised, in which
questions about its position
don't even make sense, in which
asking about the particle's
position has the same
logical status as asking
about the political
affiliations of a tuna sandwich,
like I said, or the marital
status of the number 5.
>> Particles, back to particles.
They're not matter and
they're not energy.
They're not even in space.
They're not even in time.
They are patterns
which we perceive
as a way of understanding
what's going on
in this realm, this
gooey realm that we
can't get our hands into.
It's our way of understanding.
It allows us to make
predictions that gives us
a handle on what's going on,
but it ain't the whole story
by any means.
Answer number two.
Particles aren't really
what they seem to be.
They're momentary
manifestations,
momentary poppings of this
deeper imaginary realm,
this wave-like realm,
this implicate order,
as David Bohm would
say it, this quantum
wavy function, as quantum
physicists might talk about it,
in which there is no particle.
There's just this waviness
which can spontaneously
pop out as particles.
So where do they go when
they're not in particle?
They're in wave world, or in the
alternate universe world where
the people in that
universe are asking
the same question
about those particles
when they come
into our universe.
They say, where do they go?
The best way I could describe
it is when you ain't looking,
it's like a wave, when you are
looking, it's like a particle.
Answer number three, they
went into the rabbit hole.
>> Super heroes use super
position with the world being
potential strips of
reality, until we choose.
Heroes choose what they want.
Being in many places at once,
experiencing many possibilities
all at once, and then
collapsing on the one.
The question is, how
far down the rabbit hole
do you want to go?
>> I think we love rabbit holes
so much because we realize that
there is a greater reality out
there and that the reality is
much more akin to our dreams.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> Nice shot.
>> 50 years ago, we were trying
to understand the electron.
And for God sakes,
the thing turns out
to be a wave function, OK?
It's a wave.
You can't localize it.
You try to localize it.
It really slips
through your fingers.
It's impossible to localize.
So for a while we
got used to the fact
that, OK, there are no
particles ultimately,
there are just waves.
It's called a wave function.
When you go deeper into
physics and you really
try to get a handle on
what the wave function is,
you localize that wave.
And the waves slips
through your fingers,
because the wave actually
gets replaced in quantum field
theory with something
more abstract
that doesn't even have a shape.
It must be described instead
as a simultaneous coexistence
of all possible shapes.
It's not even a
self-respecting wave.
It's something more
abstract than that.
It has slipped through
your fingers again.
And then when you get
beyond quantum field theory
to unified field theory,
you try to even grasp
the nature of that
quantum field, which
is already abstract,
and you end up
with something
that's pure being,
absolutely beyond the
intellect to even describe,
pure abstractness, pure
potentiality, pure existence.
>> But the great great
granddaddy of wacky quantum
weirdness is entanglement.
If time reversal symmetry
destroys the notion of time,
then entanglement crushes
our experience of space.
Two objects, two electrons
created together are entangled.
Send one to the other
side of the universe.
Now, do something to one and
the other responds instantly.
Instantly.
So either information is
traveling infinitely fast
or, in reality, they
are still connected.
They are entangled.
And since everything was
entangled at the moment
of the Big Bang, that means
everything is still touching.
Space is just the construct that
gives the illusion that there
are separate objects.
Are we far enough down
the rabbit hole yet?
>> To go down the rabbit
hole and to get away from
the mundane is thrilling.
Everybody secretly
is an adventurer.
When we head down
a rabbit hole, we
have to reformat
all of our knowledge
and our present
understanding and we
have to be able to combine
knowledge in a different way
than we've processed
it up to this point.
It means that we have
to step outside the box
of our most familiar, most
common way of thinking.
We have to begin to perceive the
question or the understanding
from a different point of view.
And in order to
do that, you have
to mix circuits in the brain.
>> It's tricky.
I don't know if you
want to go there.
You do want to go there?
So entanglement is space
separated and time separated.
One way of looking
very specifically
at the time separation
aspect, it's
much easier to do this with
one individual rather than two.
Because who are you better
entangled with than anyone?
It's yourself.
It's your future self
that you're entangled with
and your past self.
So the experiment that I
developed to look at this
is we wire you up,
typically to look
at skin conductance
but also heart
rate and other parameters.
You will sit in front
of a computer screen
and you press a button.
And you know that five
seconds later, you're
going to see a picture.
It could a very calm
picture or it might
be a very emotional picture.
And it's randomly
selected by the computer
immediately before it's shown.
So when you press the
button, the future
is not yet determined.
So you would need
real precognition
in order to be able to jump into
the future and get it somehow.
So since we're looking
at your physiology,
we know what happens
to physiology after you
see an emotional image.
And we know what happens
after you see a calm image.
The question is, does
that future experience
leak into your present?
Does it happen before
you see the picture?
And through this experiment,
you can see what happens.
Electrical activity
of the heart, EKG.
This is
photoplethysmograph, which
is the amount of blood in the
fingertip, and respiration,
breathing in, breathing out.
Press the button.
Well, what happens
to physiology?
Well, if it starts rising
before the image appears,
it may suggest that you're about
to get an emotional picture.
And if it stays calm,
it suggests maybe you're
going to get a calm picture.
So we've done this
kind of experiment
for several hundred
people, and colleagues have
run this experiment as well.
And as it turns out, that
is exactly what you see.
People become aroused before
randomly selected pictures
in the future that
happen to be emotional
and they remain calm before
randomly selected pictures that
are calm.
This has been seen in heart rate
changes, in skin conductance,
in the brain, and
basically systemically
throughout the body.
We are entangled with
our future selves.
>> Wormholes, or
topological fluctuations,
really channels of communication
that connect distant parts
of the universe instantaneously.
Even time travel is possible.
>> The way I understand the
rabbit hole is that it is
a portal to another reality.
Now that could be the most
banal thing in the world,
if I just open a door
and go through it,
portal means very
little in that sense.
But in the sense we're
talking about it here,
we're talking
about how we access
another dimension of reality.
>> You now can see in numerous
labs around United States
objects that are large enough
to be seen by the naked eye
and they are in two
places simultaneously.
You can actually take
a photograph of that.
Now I suppose if you showed
a photograph, they'd say, oh,
great, here's this nice
blob of colored light
and I see there's a
bit of it over here
and another bit of it.
So you've got a
picture of two dots.
What's the big deal?
>> Superposition
is pre-detection.
What I was speaking about in
the film is post detection.
Now under normal
circumstances, a single object,
once it has been detected,
is in just one position.
However, there are
states of matter
that have been created
now in which objects
can be in multiple
positions simultaneously,
not just two, but actually
as many as 3,000 positions.
The first of these objects
were called Bose Einstein
condensates.
And they are single
wave functions,
meaning they are
single particles.
But even though they're
a single wave function,
the wave function has
multiple positions.
>> And, if so, well,
look, but look.
Look right in the chamber.
You can see it right there.
Oh, I see two things there.
He said, no, no, no,
that's not two things.
That's one thing.
It's the same thing
in two places.
>> Tricky point here is that
it's still a single wave
function.
It's not 3,000 separate
wave functions.
It's one wave function.
So it's one particle.
I'm not sure that people's
jaw would drop about it.
Because I don't think
people really believe it.
I don't mean that people
say, oh, you're lying,
or, oh, the scientists
are confused.
I think it is so mysterious
that you can't even
understand how amazing it is.
One particle in 3,000
different locations.
>> Now if you were
to weigh one of them,
would it weight one
three thousandth?
>> Well you can't
weigh one of them.
>> Why?
>> Because it's one particle.
It's just-- it's one
indivisible particle.
>> But if it's in
different locations,
can't you put a scale under one?
>> No, it's inseparable.
It's not a-- this is the tricky
conceptual part, that it's not
3,000 separate parts.
>> Even though it
looks that way.
>> Right.
You can look at it and--
I mean, you can't actually
see the one with 3,000,
but you can look at the
simpler ones, the ones that
are two or three or four,
and you can see the--
you can see-- as to say, if you
go on, if you go onto the web,
you'll see photographs
of these, you'll
see these little dots
floating in space.
And these are the different
parts of one object.
It's not, they're not separable.
It's not four different objects
or six different objects,
it's one wave function,
it's one object.
>> That's a real
brain fart, isn't it?
Because when you think
about it, you just--
wait a minute, no, no, no,
they're like here, here, here.
So it's obviously
one, two, three.
>> No, and you can't pull
one away from the others.
If you try to pull one
away from the others,
the entire thing
will just disappear.
And then furthermore, you
know, you've seen "Star Trek"
and whatnot, beam me up, Scotty.
>> Beam me up, Scotty.
>> Get lost forever
down the rabbit hole.
>> How far down the
rabbit hole do you--
>> Be in the mystery.
>> So it all seems sort
of, oh, well, you know,
what does that really mean?
But you've got to
really stop and think
about what that means,
that it's the same object
and it's in two places at once.
And when people
tinker in the lab
and they get angry about
things and they have lunch
and they go home and they
lead their lives just as
though nothing utterly
astounding is happening.
Because of course, that's
how you have to go about it.
And yet, there is this
completely amazing magic
sitting right in
front of your eyes.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[CELL PHONE RINGING]
>> Where the hell are you?
I've got a studio
full of people, but--
oh, my God, there's
no photographer.
Where, oh where, can she be?
Aliens?
Loch Ness Monster?
A hot date?